# pelvis_impact_velocity
Data and code for the paper "Predicting Pelvis Impact Velocity Using Multiple Linear Regression from Experimental and Real-World Falls"

The excel file "Final_Pelvis_Impact_Velocity_Data.xlsx" is the dataset compiled from the 8 studies mentioned in the paper. Each study has its own sheet in the notebook and each sheet has the following variables: Age (yrs), Sex (F/M), Body_Mass_Avg_Imput (kg), Height_Avg_Imput (m), Fall_Direction, Cause_Of_Fall, Activity_At_Time_Of_Fall, and Vertical_Velocity (m/s). Fall_Direction has three options: backward, forward, or sideways. Cause_Of_Fall has five options: hit/bump (B), leg collapse (C), incorrect transfer (IT), loss of support (LOS), or trip/stumble (T). Activity_At_Time_Of_Fall has four options: squatting (Q), standing (S), transferring from standing to sitting (T), or walking (W). Vertical_Velocity is defined as the peak vertical velocity of the pelvis/hip at the moment of impact.

The sheets "Hsiao & Robinovitch 1998 plot" and "Hsiao & Robinovitch 1998 plot 2" are not used as they were attempts to get pelvis impact velocities for each subject using the figures in Hsiao & Robinovitch 1998. Fig. 5(b) plots pelvis impact velocities by subject and 5(c) plots pelvis impact velocities by posterior or lateral fall. The velocities from each graph were obtained and exported from PlotDigitizer to the excel file "hsiao_rob_fig5ab_data.xlsx". The mean impact velocity reported in the paper is 2.55 m/s; the Fig. 5(b) velocities do not have this mean while the velocities from Fig. 5(c) do. Fig. 3(a) reports subjects F2, F3, and M1 had a lateral fall involving pelvic impact. The sheet "plot-data (original)" is an attempt to map the Fig. 5(c) velocities to each subject based on minimizing the difference between Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 5(c) velocities while assigning the three lateral falls to F2, F3, and M1. These mapped velocities are in "Hsiao & Robinovitch 1998 plot". The sheet "sorting to subj" attempts to map the Fig. 5(c) velocities to each subject based solely on minimizing the difference between Fig. 5(b) and Fig. 5(c) velocities. These mapped velocities are used in "Hsiao & Robinovitch 1998 plot 2". Due to the discrepancy between the graphs, these sheets weren't used in favor of "Hsiao & Robinovitch 1998", which uses the average impact velocity (2.55 m/s).

The MATLAB live script "Pelvis_Impact_Velocity.mlx" is the code used for regression modelling. Age, Body_Mass_Avg_Imput, Height_Avg_Imput for papers providing none of those values are imputted using commented out code at the bottom of the script. Age imputation starts at line 825 and ends at line 886, body mass imputation starts at line 906 and ends at line 1004, and height imputation starts at line 1006 and ends at line 1101. "output_age_mc.xlsx" is an excel file containing the imputted ages for the following studies: Robinovitch et al. (2003), Robinovitch et al. (2004), Hsiao and Robinovitch, Michaels et al., Wang et al., Smeesters et al. "Final_Pelvis_Impact_Velocity_Data.xlsx" is imported and is initially fitted to three different multiple regression models: a linear model, a linear model with two-way interaction terms, and a quadratic model. Least Absolute Shrinkable and Selection Operator (LASSO) regularization was applied to each regression model, and predictors selected by LASSO using lambdas based on the minimum mean squared error (MSE) and within one standard error (1SE) of the minimum MSE were used to refit models. The Variance Inflation Factors (VIFs) for each predictor of each model were calculated. The original linear model and a model with predictors identified by the 1SE LASSO selection of the original linear model were the final models to be compared, and the adjusted R², mean squared error (MSE), mean absolute error (MAE), Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) for both models were calculated.
